# Advent of code 2023 

I was looking for an excuse to learn Rust. Advenc of Code exists. It was rather simple putting two and two together, really.

That's all this project is. A simple CLI run harness plus the solutions for each day.

I know I'm a bit late to the party. We'll see how many of these we get through, only now getting free time to look at these around the holidays.


## Fun moments / insights

### Day 3

I confess, I fell to temptation and went all "eh, I can't be bothered to parse this nicely. For loops to the rescue #yolo"
I then had to spend an embarassing amount of time debugging a subtle off by one error

Then I wrote the solution to part 2 as a declarative one liner in about 90 seconds and it worked first time.
If that's not a parable to not fall to the tempations of iterative programming and stick to functional purity, I don't know what is.

### Day 6

I briefly considered solving this as a quadratic inequality (as in windup * (time - windup) > record, solve for "windup")

That lasted all of 5 seconds until I remembered how much I'd rather not deal with floating point errors.

Afterwards I went for the "old faithful" binary search (technically, monotonic binary predicate satisfaction). All the while laughing at how much of an overkill it is for numbers you can easily do by hand.

At which point I read part 2 and was laughing for entirely different reasons.

### Day 7

Both parts are pretty trivial when using a common insight from regular poker, specifically that to compare hand ranks, you can just order the card groups from largest to smallest and compare lexicographically. E.g. four-of-a kind (4,1) > full house (3,2) > two pair (2,2) and so forth.

Having five-of-a-kind here does not disrupt that really.

The more fiddly part was working out how to dedfine "I'm a function that just derives something from a sequence without allocating a specific collection like a vector". I sort of fumbled through it feels like there should be a simpler way and I'm not sure my intuition on template lifetime types compiles to what I think it compiles.

Ah well, I'm sure there's a macro for it or something.


### Day 8

Graphs baybe!

I uh definitely misinterpreted part 2 in my head. There's no reason that after reaching an ending from a start position that it would take the same number of cycles of the instructions as it originally did to get back to an end position again.

The fact that the LCM solution just worked implies people's inputs get generated by adding up individual graph cycles and the A/Z pairings are independent. 

I suppose it's a quick way to generate a non-brute-forcable solution, so my mind naturally went there.

Sometimes lucky, I suppose...

### Day 9 

Nice try, AoC, with the attempted misdirection you have to calculate all the differences and work backwards.

You can totally apply the derivatives forwards as well, though, just have to mind the signs in part 2.

### Day 10

Now we're getting somewhere. Graph searches and geometry!

I also used the opportunity to look up how to implement traits and methods in Rust, as well as bit fields.
It's definitely very sensible overall (other than derive being annoyingly limited, though I suppose they were afraid a good-enough-most-of-the-time definition for something like Add/Sub that just distributes the oeprations might be too much of a footgun).

Overall quite happy with what I got to try on this noe.

By the way, anyone who's done geometric algorithms is probably well familiar with how to check if something is inside a given polygon via raycasting, but doing it in the context of a neighbour-list matrix is super damned fiddly.

### Day 11

I did it entirely the 'OOP' way. Or something. Not a huge enjoyer of 'make everything a member function' and that's unlikely to change in Rust.

As for the task itself, I get that it was trying to misdirect people into actually 'expanding' the universe and generating a modified map. Unfortunately for the setters I couldn't be bothered with any of that nonsense, so the two parts differ by just the expansion constant in terms of code.

### Day 12

Now we're getting some proper (relatively lightweight) contest-style stuff.

I really stubbornly wanted to brute force this, restorting to running it in parallel with a really dumb tight inner loop for the combination generator and I made it short-circuit based on a just as stupidly iterative prefix search. I left that in a separate text file to document my shame for the ages.

Obviously the memoized solution takes about 1/10th of the effort to write (and is immesurably faster). But sometimes you just have this morbid fascination to just see how far you can push a language, you know...

Also, apparently recursive closures aren't a thing. I get that borrowing stuff gets complicated, but if recursive methods are a thing (that by necessity borrow "self"), surely it's solvable. Anyway, as far as gripes go this is a rather incosequential one.


### Day 13

Pretty straightforward but the implicit assumptions that there's no ambiguity ever and that fixing the smudge in part 2 MUST be a relevant part of the reflection are doing some heavy lifting in this one. Could've probably been stated better.

Regardless, I used it as an opportunity to actually look into the module system a bit and write a 2D coordinate helper.

Coming from lots of other languages, Rust is definitely the odd one out with how things are addressed. Not entirely sold on the whole index file thing but we'll see as I get more familiar, I suppose.

### Day 14

Took a bit of a hiatus, only now getting some free time to sit down and work through it properly.

In terms of Rust learnings, I guess I'm getting more comfortable with how traits get derived and implementing iterators.
Not much beyond that, this one was mostly a re**hash** on grids, if you get my meaning.

I 100% knew part 2 was going to be tilt this a million times. That was just the obvious direction. While I don't think there's any formula for this that would reduce the complexity of tilting beyond the obvious iterating backwards along the vector of the tilt - 
admittedly I got a bit lazy there, you can memoize the next free spot as you're iterating to bring it down to O(n^2) from O(n^3),
but it's not really relevant unless you're spending 20 hours brute forcing it - the key insight is the configurations can't really be infinite so this must get stuck on a loop at some point. Then you just do some modular arithmetic and jump straight to the final configuration.

I waste sooo much unnecessary stack allocations cloning grids and only using them for a hashtable key, though. You can definitely implement this so much more efficiently, but I got way too lazy.

### Day 15

Honestly one of the most directly straightforward ones so far. It literally spells out what to do and you just follow it. Also one with perhaps the most dramatic differences between part 1 and 2: basically and entire second problem. I do like that it not-so-subtly teaches you about hashes and hash maps. 

Now, is using insertion ordered hash maps to do it in amortised linear time perhaps a bit of an overkill? Why yes, yes it is. But we're all about overkill here. Also gives me the chance to fool around with random Rust crates.

I'm still very much in love with how tightly Rust optimises iterators. Having a system language that you can still do some functional programming in without sacrificing performance is very neat.